---
Alias: Искусство Спора
Author: Сергей Поварнин
Status: #reading 
Type: 
Cover: https://images-na.ssl-images-amazon.com/images/S/compressed.photo.goodreads.com/books/1627479940i/58650280.jpg
Annotation:: "Читать книги – что может быть проще? Мы обучены чтению с начальной школы, но как мы читаем? Да "как читается", а между тем вреда от такого чтения зачастую больше, чем пользы. Поэтому вдумчивому читателю просто необходимо ознакомиться с приемами и навыками рационального чтения. Кроме того, предлагаемое в сборнике "Искусство спора", наряду с "Искусством побеждать в спорах" А. Шопенгауэра, научит читать "между строк" средства массовой информации и замечать их уловки, а также правильно излагать свои доводы в любых дискуссиях."
Year:
---

---

### 🚀 The Book in 3 Sentences

### 🎨 Impressions

#### How I Discovered It

#### Who Should Read It?

### ☘️ How the Book Changed Me

> How my life / behaviour / thoughts / ideas have changed as a result of reading the book.

## ✍️ My Top 3 Quotes

## 📒 Ideas
### Main thing in any argument
- It is essential to understand that argument, without clear goal in mind is useless affair.
	- The main goals for any argument are only these two.
		- Validating personal position.
		- Invalidating opponent’s position.
	- For this we have to set up a clear thesis of the argument. ^bb7e4f
		- In a way that it both understood and accepted.
		- To do this, three steps are often enough, but not everyone goes this length.
		- 1. All words in the statement hold same meaning for opposing sides.
		- 2. Next step would be the drawing of the borders.
			- Are we talking about all objects that are included in the category of the argument, or some portion of it.
			- Like, assertion that “All people are evil”.
			- Is it really all, or only some of them?
			- This point often is called defining the quantifiers of the thesis.
		- 3. And the last comes our attitude towards thesis.
			- Do we accept it as false or true, or maybe partially true or partially false.
			- Level of certainty is also of importance.
			- Possible or impossible, etc. 
			- This last point is called modality of the argument.
				- This is what we really mean when we speak about attitude towards argument.

### On evidence and argumentation and connection between one and the other
- Several conditions must be fulfilled for a successful resolution of a dispute.
	- First and foremost, the point of an argument must be valid for both sides.
	- Statements of arguments and counterarguments should be done simply and clearly.
		- Act according to the Occam’s razor. [[Critical thinking#Occam’s razor principle]]
	- The most crucial point is the existence of the connection between the topic of the debate and arguments.
		- If there is no connection between the two, then there is nothing to prove.
		- Thought it couldn’t be seen as obvious, subtle also works.

#### Mistakes in proof can happen
- Usually there is three main suspects.
	- In thesis itself. Sometime the topic of the argument saying the least controversial.
	- In Argument. When we prove from the false premise or with the help of random argument that needs to be proved itself.
	- And in the connection between one and another. As I’ve mentioned it is the most crucial point, the connection between the topic and the arguments.
	- 

### 📚Related Books
- [[Искусство спора - Сергей Поварнин.canvas]]