---
Alias: Когда книга учит
Author: Г.Г. Граник, Л.А. Концевая, С.М. Бондаренко
---

### 🚀 The Book in 3 Sentences

### 🎨 Impressions

#### How I Discovered It
It has been sent to me by a member of my community. How fascinating, there are so many books I don’t know of.

#### ❓ Questions to the book
- How to turn a book into an adviser and help?
- How can a reading activity be defined, what is it at the core?
- What kind of exercises authors offer to train the skill of active reading?

### ☘️ How the Book Changed Me

> How my life / behaviour / thoughts / ideas have changed as a result of reading the book.

## ✍️ My Top 3 Quotes

## 📒 Ideas
### Stages of the book processing
- I honestly thought that the demanding reader’s first point of contact happens when we ask ourselves questions.
	- [[План урока - Скимминг#^db4ce2]]
	- But to be honest, it’s not the first point of contact.
		- The work of the reader begins with thinking, and it’s also a reading process, but instead of reading preface and conclusion we read headings and epigraphs if there are any.
	- Heading of chapters and epigraphs are elements of an entrance door of the text.
		- They not only set up a certain mood for all further reading, but also adjust thinking patterns and provide the overall sense of the book.
		- Without proper understanding of the author’s plan and intent, which he sets in careful choice of headings and epigraphs, the meaning of the text might miss the reader.
		- Understanding of the author’s intent with which he soaked the heading gives edginess and clarity to the whole process of reading.
		- *Prediction of the author’s argumentation from the heading* of the chapter is a *nice exercise*. It is also possible to draw the conclusion from just from the heading and compare it later with our guesses. ^af6eae
	- After the thinking stage, dialogue comes into the foreground.
		- The dialogue in itself is a complex cognitive process, but dialogue with the book is also a highly focused work. [[Deep Work#^a2d598]]
		- Only a demanding reader is capable of it.
			- [[analytical apparatus of reading#^41ab36]]
		- The demanding reader not only reads attentively but, foremost, he asks questions. 
			- Constantly, and he doesn’t limit himself to the basic questions, such as.
				- What do I want to learn, or what I already know about the book.
				- His goal is to understand the author and his ideas on the profound level.
					- To do this, I keep in mind another question. [[Фундаментальные вопросы для jumpstart а мыслительной деятельности]]
	- There is still one unclear question, when the real process of in-depth understanding happens?
		- After all notes have been integrated into the system, during the paraphrasing stage or when we look at how to connect ideas from the book?
		- In my experience, real understanding comes when we change something in life, in a small way, or when we implement synthesized knowledge from the book to somehow improve personal work.

### Content Doesn’t Play Any Role in Understanding, Only Links Between Ideas
- Once, I thought about the connection between the notes as a form of poetry. [[Связи это поэзия]], and I still think the same way, but now my belief in this idea has intensified.
	- The link between ideas is of greater significance than any separate idea.
	- This phenomenon has been explored on numerous occasions. The most recent, I believe, was done by Kahneman and Tversky in [[Thinking Fast and Slow]].
		- They showed some words to groups of students and then asked them to walk the length of the corridor.
			- In the end, students who read words: spring, youth, speed, agility walked the distance faster than those who read: old, winter, frailty, slow.
			- They associated the words with the meaning and were primed.
		- The same phenomenon has been observed in movies and literature and is called the [Kuleshov’s effect](https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Эффект_Кулешова).
			- Kuleshov established that the audience is influenced not when they witness a single scene in a movie or read it from the pages, but by the way different scenes are assembled and deliver the overall picture of the action.
			- It again points to the fact that an idea alone is worth nothing; only in connection with others does it become valuable.
	- Among Russian editors of the previous century, there existed a joke that *a telegraph pole is nothing more than a well-redacted pine*. ^b1c752
- Povarnin famously said that to measure a book and size up its value and wisdom, it’s not enough to be a well-educated person.
	- Skill and hard work are required for this type of work. Because some authors have few mistakes and nothing of value, others have tons of them but through every line, value just catches and processes.
	- Greatness is not measured by mistakes or the purity of the text, but by the ideas, and whether they have changed anything in your behavior and actions[^1].
- After each chapter, make an effort to give yourself a short and clear answer to what the chapter has been about. *What are the main ideas, and how are they all connected?*

### In-depth understanding is when a demanding reader starts a dialogue with the author
- Firstly, it calls for intensive and focused work, for which only a demanding reader is capable of.
	- An idea of the text and we don’t even think about discussing a web of ideas, yet, only understood on the level of readiness of a reader to accept certain ideas from the text.
- This kind of work puts under the spotlight various vague definitions, strange colloquial. These all set the reader on a path of exploration, which must happen only after the reading is finished.
	- Without the ability to work for a sustained period of time, instead of a demanding reader, he becomes an inattentive reader. Who misses key information and skims aimlessly around the book.
	- Don’t scratch the covers of the book, open it and mark it with your handwriting.
- Several things are responsible for successful understanding of information.
	- One of them, the ability to google questionable words and definitions on the Internet. And an assortment of skills in using diverse sources for referencing.


> [!question] When the process of deep understanding begins?
> - Once I had a discussion with Sergei Baranov, a yoga and Dzen teacher, he noticed that the process of rewriting notes into coherent and logical structure heavily reworked from a personal standpoint, the notes themselves look like it is a new book.
> 	- I tend to agree with his thoughts. So, in my opinion, the in-depth understanding of the concept happens, when we try to explain something, firstly to yourself, on the paper, then to someone else.
> 	- The process of connecting the dots. [[How to read literature like a pro#^b9954b]]. Assembling notes and looking for something that there is already. It’s an engaging process and fascinating at the core.
> 	- But even deeper understanding happens when we correlate the written text and principles to real life practice in such way that the end note that is produces has the personal meaning and relevant to work.

- Thus, the attention to tiny details is important, and understanding of personal limitation is critical for profound understanding of the text and ideas.
	- The goal is to overcome of challenges that rise on the path of understanding, unknown concepts, principles, definitions.
	- Research in a certain way is the pinnacle of intellectual work.
		- It is the first stage of deep intellectual processing of perceived information.
		- The key trait that the learner must have to be successful in the process in the self-efficacy. He must have skills to manage individual educational process.
	- A human is the ideal [[What is rationality#^260166|prediction]] machine, in reading it happens the moment our expectation from the book, personal experience collides with the text for the first time. From the moment of collision, we start building multiple prognoses.  ^c75e58
		- During pre-reading, we formulate expectations in the form of questions.
		- When interacting with the book, skimming demands great cognitive resources to predict the ending of the paragraph, relevance of provided by the author examples, and reasoning he used to come to the conclusion he draws.
		- This ability, to predict, relies heavily on one specific ability – to remember something, and the brain is a one faulty tool for the task of remembering.
			- That’s why we have to externalize the process. There are to major ways:
				- Rigorous questioning. Which is nice, but too unpredictable.
				- Note-taking. Which is an effortful process.
				- But that’s so far are the only tools to boost memory and the quality of work. Remember, revise, and deliver. The highest possible product. [[Deep Work#^2ba30d]]

### 📚Related Books
- [[Когда книга учит.canvas]]

[^1]: 1. Поварнин С. Искусство спора. Как читать книги / С. Поварнин, 1924. ([Page 259](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/B3M82EWQ?page=259&annotation=QQT22ZM4))