---
Alias:: Путь Джедая
Author:: [[Максим Дорофеев]]
Status:: Completed
Type:: non-fiction
Year:: 2022
Cover:: https://cdn1.ozone.ru/s3/multimedia-3/wc1200/6104321667.jpg
---
## Путь Джедая

### 🚀 The Book in 3 Sentences

### 🎨 Impressions

#### How I Discovered It

#### Who Should Read It?

### ☘️ How the Book Changed Me

> How my life / behaviour / thoughts / ideas have changed as a result of reading the book.

## ✍️ My Top 3 Quotes

## 📒 Ideas

[[Six staged diary of monks]] practice of self-monitoring.

Lots can be indirectly linked to [[Atomic Habits]] by James Clear

`Questions that should be asked on everyday basis:` [[4 questions for analyzing energy drains]]

1.  What do you want from your life?
2.  What are you willing to do for it?
3.  And what you are you willing to give up?
4.  Is any risk acceptable?
5.  Are you ready to dive in without a detailed plan and any guarantees?

`Noticed interesting things:`
-   Why so many ideas from Taleb?
-   Don’t remember Buddhism in Jedi’s techniques, at all.
    
`Look up` [`Tim Urban`](https://waitbutwhy.com) `website and books.`Too many references.
-   First part of chapter brought the most obvious ideas. About sleep: lack of sleep brings forward reactiveness and anxiety. Reflexes dominate over rational thinking. But Idea is not full without Mathew Walkers tips on sleep [[12 tips how to sleep well]]
- [[Too much work brings procrastination]]. When we have lots to do we usually add something else to the bucket and make a longer and bigger list of things we have to deal with, unintentionally filling all free space with non essential activities. If we do some time deeds that we don’t want to do then time comes when we don’t want to do what we actually want to do.
[`Mindfulness`](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/11350120-mindfulness)`, by Mark Williams and Danny Penman, beautidul and long list practices that might help in training. Book provides with various practices`

[[Week 1 Meeting Jedi way chapters 1 to 5]]

[[Week 2 Meeting Jedi way chapter 6]]

Recently I've received a letter from Ali Abdal, about separating PLANNING and DOING, so I thought to make a note about his framework and add it to my project management style. [[Фреймворк управления делами и проектами]]

- [[Methodological betterment of Jedi techniques course]], invitation from Maxim.